TAHLEQUAH – A multi-million-dollar effort to transform a former casino into the Cherokee Nation’s new language hub is expected to wrap up later this year.

Barring unforeseen setbacks, construction and renovation should be completed by Labor Day weekend, according to Language Department Executive Director Howard Paden.

“So we may be looking at opening up sometime in October, a lot faster than what I thought,” Paden said. “This is incredible.”

Construction of the $5 million Durbin Feeling Language Center in Tahlequah began in May 2021. New wings have been added to each side of the building, doubling the space for a total of more than 50,000 square feet.

Once expansion and remodeling of the former Cherokee Casino-Tahlequah building is complete, the tribe will place all of its language-related programs under one roof.

“About everything that will happen with language revitalization will be here,” Paden said. “We’ll obviously have translation. We’ll have master-apprentice. We’ll have the immersion school. Those are big programs, but there are several small programs that will also be nestled within these walls.”

The immersion school, called ᏣᎳᎩ ᏧᎾᏕᎶᏆᏍᏗ (Tsalagi Tsunadeloquasdi), has grown to more than 100 students in grades pre-K through eighth grade, according to the tribe. The curriculum is Oklahoma Department of Education grade-level standards, but instruction is taught exclusively in the Cherokee language, both written and spoken. The Sequoyah syllabary is used for all print materials.

Former immersion school student Ethan Winn, now 21, was impressed with the language center even in its construction phase.

“It means a lot, the thought they’re putting into this to make it all Cherokee,” he said. “Here, it means so much to see there is going to be essentially a whole new generation that’s going to grow up knowing how to be Cherokee.”

An important goal for Paden and other language advocates is creating new speakers either through the CN’s master-apprentice program or at the immersion school.

“There’s less than 2,000 speakers,” Paden said. “We lost 150 of them last year. We’re trying to build as many speakers as we can and to the highest level.”

Immersion school students are introduced to the Cherokee language at an early age.

“We want first-language speakers,” Paden said. “Now that doesn’t mean that we don’t mind somebody having two first languages, but one of them has to be Cherokee. We never want a time on this earth there’s not a first-language Cherokee speaker.”

The language center is named after the late linguist Durbin Feeling, widely considered the greatest modern contributor to the preservation of the Cherokee language. Feeling died in August 2020 at age 74. According to the tribe, Feeling wrote the Cherokee dictionary, added the syllabary on a word processor in the 1980s, developed hundreds of Cherokee language teaching materials and started the process to add the Cherokee language on Unicode, which today allows smartphones to offer the syllabary.

In 2019, the CN Tribal Council passed the Durbin Feeling Preservation Act to invest $16 million in the Cherokee language, $5 million of which was earmarked for the new language center.

“We want this accessible to everybody,” Paden said. “We have language technology – we’re making cartoons, we’re making apps. We’ve got to bring the language into this century by all means, but to keep the remnants of … these sort of philosophies that we have as Cherokee people. It has to still be within our language and it has to be within our people. If we do that, we will always be Cherokee.”